The following comma separated list contains the 109 final search terms that we
used to identify as many TOTP apps in the Google Play Store as possible. The 32
core search terms are marked with an asterisk (*). See Section 4.1 "App
Selection" in the paper for more details.

2 factor*, 2 factor authentication*, 2 factor authentication app, 2 factor
authentication app facebook, 2 factor authentication app free, 2 factor
authentication discord, 2 step *, 2 step verification app, 2 step verification
app walmart, 2 step verification bypass, 2 step verification sony, 2-factor*,
2-factor authentication*, 2-factor authentication app, 2-factor authentication
code, 2-step verification*, 2-step verification app, 2fa*, 2fa app, 2fa
authenticator, 2fa authenticator app, 2fa fortnite, 2face, 2sv*, 2sv
authenticator, 2sv authenticator app, 2sv authenticator app sony, 2sv2,
authenticator*, authenticator app fortnite, authenticator app microsoft,
authenticator blizzard, authenticator google, code generator*, code generator
app, code generator facebook, code generator for facebook, code generator for
facebook login, duo multi factor authentication, mfa*, mfa app, mfa
authenticator, mfa boston, mfa mobile app, multi factor*, multi factor
authentication*, multi factor authentication app, multi factor authenticator,
multi factor authenticator app, multi-factor*, multi-factor authentication*,
multi-factor authentication (mfa), multi-factor authentication app, multi-factor
authentication application, multi-factor authentication mobile app,
multifactor*, multifactor authentication*, multifactor authentication for office
365, multifactor authentification, multifactorial authentication, one time
password*, one time password (otp), one time password app lock, one time
password authenticator, one time password ff14, one time password ffxiv, one
time password square enix, one-time password*, otp*, otp app, otp authenticator,
otp authenticator samsung, otpauth, setup multi factor authentication, tfa*, tfa
app, tface, tfacebook, tfanslate, time based one time password*, time based
one-time password*, time-based one time password*, time-based one-time
password*, totp*, totp app, totp authenticator, totp authenticator app,
totp-compliant authentication software, two factor*, two factor authentication*,
two factor authentication app, two factor authentication app discord, two factor
authentication app facebook, two factor authentication app fortnite, two step
verification*, two step verification app, two step verification discord, two
step verification facebook, two step verification walmart, two step verification
whatsapp, two-factor*, two-factor authentication*, two-factor authentication
(2fa), two-factor authentication app, two-factor authentication code, two-factor
authenticator, two-factor authenticator app, two-step verification*, two-step
verification token service